Feb 05: I began the process of data gathering. While the specific question I want to answer is not fully formulated yet, I decided to begin anyway with hopes that as I began exploring the data, something interesting would come to mind. I am sourcing energy data from the US Energy Information Administration (https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/) and climate-related data (temperatures, cloud cover, wind conditions, etc.) from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Climate Data Online tool (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web). For now, I am just exploring the various data columns available and examining their plots in Jupyter notebooks.

Feb 12: I have a clearer idea of what I want to work on now: identifying whether there exists a measurable anthropogenic impact on the variability of Earth's atmospheric spectra. I spent most of yesterday doing literature review to this end, and found these articles most useful:
* https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s40641-016-0039-5.pdf : review article covering work done in the domain of spectroscopic measurements of Earth's Outgoing Longwave Radiation (OLR) and Reflected Shortwave (RSW).
* https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1029/2004JD005530 : PCA of OLR from AIRS early 2000s data; identified that 95% of variability in atmospheric spectra could be attributed to a few traceable PCs linked with specific environmental processes
* https://acp.copernicus.org/articles/13/3133/2013/acp-13-3133-2013.pdf : a similar analysis of RSW data using data from the SCIAMACHY spectrometer
There are a few articles like this finding various dimensionality reduction techniques are useful in isolating spectral variance to climate trends across spatial and temporal regions. I want to see if some small fraction of the variance can be correlated with human behavior--energy production/consumption by spatial region, for example--to see if there is a traceable impact on atmospheric gas composition.

I've started acquiring public data from the SCIAMACHY instrument, and I'm spending some time learning the custom data analysis environment the European Space Agency provides for processing and analysis of their atmospheric spectra. Hopefully afterwards it becomes straightforward to bulk-process the ~decade worth of data and start experimenting with some dimensionality reduction techniques.

Feb 19: Useful links
scil1c guide (command-line tool to calibrate level 1b to 1c product files): https://www.google.com/search?q=scial1c+guide&rlz=1C1CHBF_enUS731US731&oq=scial1c+guide&aqs=chrome..69i57j69i60.4008j0j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8
sciamachy product handbook (science description of the telescope and spectrometer): https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/documents/20142/37627/Envisat-SCIAMACHY-product-handbook.pdf
I'm now able to use the ESA-provided Python APIs to reduce, calibrate, and visualize SCIAMACHY spectra. However, I'm seeing strange data artifacts with unphysical spectral ranges, which is likely related to some shortcoming in how I'm calibrating the data. This was good progress, though; once I figure out how to properly calibrate the spectra, the next step will be to amass a large quantity of them and then I can start doing some preliminary PCA.

Final update: My apologies for not having updated the journal in a while--after February I had to travel for most of March, and fell out of the rhythm of regularly keeping up on schoolwork. I like to think I worked double-time for most of April to make up for it, though, but by then I had fallen out of the habit of weekly updating the journal. A summary of my work over the past month+, and rough dates when these developments occured:
Late Feb/Early March: After exploratory modelling with the SCIAMACHY data, and learning how to extract physically sound reflectance spectra for various scene types, I found it was computationally infeasible to work directly on the reflectance spectra. They are too high-dimensional and expensive to work with; I would need access to a high-performance cluster to manage a reasonable volume of data. For reference one day of SCIAMACHY reflectance spectra takes about 8 GB; for any reasonable study, I would want data integrated at least over a month, preferably longer. So for a while I was pretty stumped about how I would go forward; I really wanted to work on spectral data, and had invested decent time into backgorund reading already.

Mid-March: Around here I learned that, in addition to raw reflectance spectra from nadir measurements, SCIAMACHY processed and released trace gas column densities from a technique called Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy (DOAS; you can read about it in the user handbook linked above). So I decided to go with those and try to compare how the Roberts et al. 2013 (final study linked above) would hold up against this data product. The trace gas densities are ultimately derived from the same physical measurements, and in some sense they are the more "distilled" variables of direct physical interest--so it would be interesting to see how much information is captured in these data.

Early April: After having not gotten to work on the project for a little while, I was ready to get back into producing some results. So in the first week of April I did a deep dive of the Roberts et al. study and followed most of their methodology: acquired data from four months of 2004 and standardizing the temporal and spatial resolution/gridding, then using the Python scikit-learn PCA decomposition techniques to do a dimensionality reduction analysis on the data. Recalling the class discussion we had early on about dimensionality reduction, I also spent quite a while experimenting with other techniques--like manifold learning/diffusion maps which we saw in the Tomaselli et al. study in learning different types of smoke quality from forest fires (https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.04651.pdf). Python has support for diffusion maps, but I had significant trouble obtaining reasonable results on my dataset with these techniques. 

Mid-April: At this point I moved to the next step of working with simulated data, which is present in absurdly large quantity and resolution. Unfortunately given the time and computing resources available to me, I deemed it infeasible to access data below year-level time resolution, though it's present all the way down to the hour level(!) I'm getting it from here: https://www.earthsystemgrid.org, specifically looking for atmospheric trace gas column densities from 2004 to compare one-to-one against the results of my SCIAMACHY analysis.

Late April: At this point I'm putting finishing touches on my analysis, and reading into the technique used by Roberts et al. of quantitative subspace comparison/intersection by way of calculating a distance metric between the subspaces spanned by two sets of Principal Components. I'm surprised there isn't more work in this regime, actually, considering that PCA is such a wide-spread tool: I looked at various approaches to comparing PC subspaces for climate applications and came up with relatively little past literature.

Some general remarks in retrospect, now having worked on this project: I definitely want to continue working with this data, it took literally *months* for me to become comfortable obtaining, interpreting, and analyzing SCIAMACHY spectral data and I feel I've only begun to scratch the surface of interesting science to be done. Satellite data like this is generally more inaccessible, and nearly every single paper I've read in this space is by domain experts (i.e. climate scientists) rather than CS/ML people, in stark contrast to much of the reading we did throughout our classes this semester. I can understand why now, considering the amount of physics, chemistry, data pre-processing, etc. that goes into being able to sensibly use this data. However, now that I've begun to work on that, I think there's a lot of room for innovation in a relatively uncrowded niche. Over the summer, I'd like to go back and take another look at the possibility of training supervised models with various natural and anthropogenic independent variables to explain the observed spatial/temporal variability of SCIAMACHY reflectance spectra--that would be a cool project making use of some state-of-the-art satellite information, allowing it to become interpretable at a policy-making/lifestyle level.
